---
layout: post
title: Hedgerows and mob grazing
---

What area of land would need to be planted with trees to make up for the methane emissions from a single cow?

One dairy cow emits about 100 kg of methane per year (~50-75 kg/yr for non-dairy cattle). Methane has a global warming potential about 25 times that of CO₂ over a 100-year period, so that is equivalent to about 2,500 kg of CO₂ per year.

Averaged over a forestry rotation, a woodland stores about 10 kg carbon / m$^2$ more than grassland = 36.7 kg CO2 / m$^2$.

So, to offset the annual emissions from one cow, every year you would need to plant about 68 m$^2$ of new woodland (2,500 kg CO₂ / year divided by 36.7 kg C/m$^2$ / year).

In some ways, the area the cattle occupy does not matter - you just need to plant 68 m$^2$ of new woodland per head per year. However, if you want to express the required afforestation rate as a fraction of the land area used for grazing, there are two complications.

Firstly, it depends on the cattle stocking density.
A typical stocking density for conservation grazing is ~0.25 LU/ha = 1 cow per 4 hectares = 1 cow per 40,000 m$^2$.
The required 68 m$^2$/yr of woodland would constitute 0.17%/yr or 1/587th/yr of the land area used for grazing that cow (68 m$^2$ / 40,000 m$^2$ * 100).

Secondly, because new woodland is required each year to offset the annual methane emissions, we are comparing an afforestation *rate* (m$^2$/yr) with a fixed grazed area (in m$^2$). To make these comparable, we can consider the emissions from one cow over a fixed time period, compared with the required area of woodland for offsetting over this time period. This is completely arbitrary, but for illustration, one cow at 0.25 LU/ha for 60 years requires 68 m$^2 \times$ 60 = ~4000 m$^2$ = 10%.

Less arbitrarily, we could assume that both the grazing and afforestation take place within the same fixed area. In this case, we start with 40000 m$^2$ of grassland per cow, and convert 68 m$^2$ to woodland each year. In this scenario, grassland is gradually displaced by woodland over time, so the cattle stocking density increases until the whole area is covered by woodland after 587 years.
The stocking density reaches 1 LU/ha after 440 years, which might be a sensible cut-off threshold. Perhaps defining the time span over which the grazing stocking density is below some acceptable threshold is a better measure, as this forces us to consider sustainability of a finite land area (rather than assuming that land will be available to be afforested elsewhere).
